
                               _Freezing_
                        combination main dishes


                    Home and Garden Bulletin No. 40
                     U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE




                                Freezing
                        combination main dishes


Vacant space in your freezer? Put some of it to use by freezing main
dishes—prepared, ready to be heated or cooked and served. Days or weeks
later you, your family, guests perhaps, can enjoy the results of your
foresight.

Included in this publication are general directions for successful
freezing of such main dishes as the stews, meat loaves, and casserole
combinations made from recipes given on pages 6 to 19.

For tiptop quality and economical use of freezer space, plan your
freezing and use of precooked main dishes so that they will be in the
freezer no longer than 2 or 3 months. However, most of these foods if
properly packaged and stored will not suffer serious quality loss if
kept up to 6 months. After 6 months’ storage, quality often declines
rapidly, but the food is still safe to eat.


Preparing the food

In general, prepare the food as you would if it were to be served right
away. Do not overcook. Some ingredients in main dishes that must be
reheated for serving are better if slightly underdone for freezing. If
cooked well-done before freezing, foods such as vegetables and macaroni
are likely to be too soft when reheated. They also may have a
warmed-over taste.

Soups and sauces thickened with ordinary wheat flour may tend to
separate or curdle on thawing. Frozen gravies, sauces, and soups may be
somewhat thicker after thawing than when freshly prepared, but suitable
liquid can be added to give the desired consistency. Commercially frozen
soups, sauces, and gravies are often made with waxy rice flour, which
results in a smoother product. If waxy rice flour is available, it is a
good idea to use it. However, soups, sauces, and gravies made with
ordinary flour can be satisfactory if they are quick-frozen and stored
at 0° F. for only 2 to 3 months. Stirring during reheating helps to
overcome separation, too.

Crumb or cheese toppings are best added when the food is reheated for
serving.

Pastry crusts frozen unbaked are more tender and flaky and have a
fresher flavor than those baked and then frozen.


Cooling

Quick cooling of the food immediately after it is cooked stops the
cooking and so helps keep the natural flavor, color, and texture of the
food. It also retards or prevents the growth of bacteria that may cause
spoilage.

To cool, set uncovered pan of food in iced or very cold water; change
the water to keep it cold. Or set pan on ice. Or put the uncovered pan
of food in a cold place.


Packaging

As soon as the food is cool, put it promptly into freezer containers of
moisture-vapor-proof or moisture-vapor-resistant packaging material.
Pack the food tightly into the container to reduce the amount of air in
the package.

In quart containers, the food may be separated into two or three layers
by a double thickness of water-resistant material such as cellophane
between the layers. This makes it possible to separate the frozen block
of food easily to shorten the reheating time.

Choose a size of container that holds only enough for one meal for your
family. Quart containers hold 4 to 6 servings; pints, 2 to 3. Use only
containers with wide top openings so the food does not have to be thawed
completely to remove it from the container.

Containers and materials. Many combination main dishes are semiliquid in
consistency and are best packaged in rigid containers made of
moisture-vapor-proof materials such as aluminum, glass, pottery,
plastic, plain or enameled tin, or moisture-vapor-resistant material
such as heavily waxed cardboard.

Some prepared foods, like meat pies and casserole dishes, may be frozen
in the containers in which they were baked, ready for reheating at time
of using.

Bags of suitable material can be used for semiliquid foods but are less
convenient than rigid containers. They are well adapted to less moist
foods. Sheets of freezer packaging materials are used for wrapping foods
that hold their shape.

Bags and sheets are made of moisture-vapor-resistant cellophane, heavy
aluminum foil, pliofilm, polyethylene, or laminated papers consisting of
combinations of paper, metal foil, glassine, cellophane, or other
materials.

Unwaxed folding cardboard cartons are often used to hold foods packaged
in bags or sheets for protection against tearing and for easy stacking
in the freezer. Sheets of packaging material may be used as outer wraps
for unwaxed cardboard cartons containing unwrapped foods. The sheets are
sealed with freezer tape, or with a warm iron if they are heat-sealing
on both sides.

Ordinary waxed papers, household aluminum foil, and cartons designed for
cottage cheese and ice cream are not sufficiently
moisture-vapor-resistant to be suitable for packaging foods to be frozen
and held more than a few days.

Head space. Since liquid expands as it freezes, allow ample head space
when packing liquid and semiliquid foods. Most freezer containers have a
mark or line to show how much head space to leave. For a tall, straight
or slightly flared container and for bags, ½ inch is generally
recommended for pints and 1 inch for quarts. For low, broad containers
less head space is needed, about ¼ inch for pints and ½ inch for quarts.
To assure a good closure, keep sealing edges free from moisture or food.

When packaging foods with freezer sheet material, wrap them as tightly
as possible.

Sealing. Seal rigid freezer containers by adjusting the lids as required
for the type of package used. Casseroles made of ovenproof material can
be covered and then sealed with freezer tape or wrapped as needed.

Bags can be sealed by twisting and folding back the top and securing
with a string or with a paper-covered metal strip or rubber band that
may come with the bag. Some bags and sheets may be heat-sealed with a
warm household iron or one of the special sealing irons available on the
market. Others may be sealed with freezer tape.


Freezing

Freeze prepared foods as soon as they are packed. Freeze and store at 0°
F. or below.


Reheating for serving

Most precooked frozen foods can be reheated either in the oven or on top
of the range. Reheating in the oven takes little of the cook’s attention
and usually keeps the texture of the food better. Reheating on top of
the range in a double boiler or saucepan is faster.

When using a double boiler, start with warm, not hot, water in the lower
pan so the thawing food won’t stick.

Reheating over direct heat requires considerable attention because the
food must be stirred often. The stirring may result in less desirable
texture.

If heating several blocks of frozen food, don’t stack them—use a wider
pan.

Generally it is better to reheat frozen cooked main dishes without
thawing. However, to transfer the food to another container for
reheating or to remove cellophane between layers, you will need to
partially thaw the food. Do this by placing the package in lukewarm
water for a few minutes.

If you thaw food completely before reheating, it is usually best to thaw
in the refrigerator. Thawing at room temperature is not recommended.
Once food is thawed, use it immediately.




                               _RECIPES_


When you are preparing a main dish it often takes little more effort and
time to make enough for several meals. You can freeze it all in
meal-size packages, or serve part of it the same day and freeze the
rest.

The following recipes yield enough for 16 to 25 portions of the size
indicated. For these larger-than-usual quantities you may need to check
the size of your cooking utensils. As a guide to the size of utensil
needed, multiply the number of portions by the size of portion to find
out the total quantity of food that the recipe makes.

Recipes include directions both for serving the food immediately and for
reheating the frozen food for serving.


_POULTRY COMBINATION DISHES_

Creamed chicken and chicken a la king are two favorites for freezing.
Recipes are also given here for chicken and turkey in appetizing
casserole dishes that freeze well.

If chicken broth is not available, you can substitute 1 cup canned
chicken bouillon or 1 chicken bouillon cube and 1 cup hot water for each
cup of chicken broth called for in a recipe.


Creamed chicken

                       _16 portions, ¾ cup each_

  ¾ cup chicken fat, butter, or margarine
  1⅛ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  1 tablespoon salt
  4 cups chicken broth
  4 cups milk
  2 quarts diced cooked chicken

Melt the fat and blend in the flour and salt. Add broth and milk. Cook
until thickened, stirring constantly. Add the chicken and heat to blend
flavors.

_To serve immediately._ Heat the mixture thoroughly and serve on rice,
toast, or biscuits.

_To freeze._ Cool the food quickly. Pack in freezer containers, leaving
head space (p. 4). (Pint containers are preferable to larger ones
because large blocks of creamed chicken are difficult to thaw.) Seal and
freeze immediately.

_To prepare for serving._ Without thawing, heat frozen creamed chicken
in the top of a double boiler, about 30 minutes for 1 pint.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve with snap beans and shredded carrot and raisin
salad. Have fruit sherbet and crisp cookies for dessert.


Chicken a la king

                       _16 portions, ¾ cup each._

  ½ cup chicken fat, butter, or margarine
  6 tablespoons chopped green pepper
  3 cups canned mushrooms
  ¾ cup sifted all-purpose flour
  2 teaspoons salt
  3 cups chicken broth
  3 cups milk
  6 tablespoons finely cut pimiento
  3 pints diced cooked chicken

Melt the fat and cook green pepper and mushrooms in it about 5 minutes.
Blend in the flour and salt, then add broth and milk. Cook until
thickened, stirring constantly. Add pimiento and chicken. Blend well.

_To serve immediately._ Heat the mixture thoroughly and serve on
biscuits, hot, buttered toast, or in timbales.

_To freeze._ Cool the food quickly. Pack in freezer containers, leaving
head space (p. 4). (Pint containers are preferable to larger ones
because large blocks of chicken a la king are difficult to thaw.) Seal
and freeze immediately.

_To prepare for serving._ Without thawing, heat frozen chicken a la king
in the top of a double boiler, about 30 minutes for 1 pint.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve with asparagus and stuffed tomato salad, and
upside-down cake.


Turkey-macaroni casserole

                       _25 portions, ¾ cup each_

  1¼ quarts shell or other macaroni
  2 quarts boiling salted water
  ⅔ cup melted butter or margarine
  1¼ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  2 quarts milk
  1½ tablespoons salt
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  1 teaspoon marjoram
  2½ cups grated cheese
  ¾ cup chopped pimiento
  1¼ quarts diced cooked turkey

Cook the macaroni in boiling salted water 15 minutes or until almost
tender; drain and rinse with water. Combine the melted butter or
margarine with the flour, stir in the milk, and cook until thick. Add
seasonings, cheese, pimiento, macaroni, and turkey.

_To serve immediately._ Place enough for one meal in a greased casserole
and top with grated cheese if desired. Bake uncovered at 350° F.
(moderate oven) for 30 to 40 minutes.

_To freeze._ Cool the food quickly. Pack in freezer containers, leaving
head space (p. 4). Seal and freeze immediately.

_To prepare for serving._ Bake uncovered at 400° F. (hot oven) until
food is heated through, about 45 minutes for pints, 1 hour for quarts.

A topping of grated cheese may be added to this dish the last 5 minutes
of heating.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve with broiled tomato halves and julienne snap
beans. Steamed cranberry pudding would make a good dessert for this
meal.


_MEAT STEWS AND MEAT PIES_

Almost any type of meat stew, ragout, or goulash—beef, lamb, pork, or
veal—can be frozen. Most vegetables in these combination dishes freeze
well. Frozen potatoes may not be of the same quality as fresh-cooked
potatoes, but they are acceptable if the stew or meat pie is not stored
for more than 6 months.

Add a rich, flaky biscuit or pastry topping to a good meat and vegetable
stew and you have a delicious meat pie, a family treat that freezes
well. The biscuit or pastry topping may be added before freezing or made
fresh and added to the pie when reheating for serving.

It is best to freeze meat pies and turnovers unbaked.


Lamb or beef pie

                     _24 portions, 2½ by 2¾ inches_

  3 pounds boneless lamb or beef cut in 1-inch pieces
  1 quart water
  1 tablespoon salt
  1½ cups chopped celery
  3 cups cubed potatoes
  3½ cups quartered onions
  ½ cup peas, fresh or frozen
  ½ cup sifted all-purpose flour
  Pastry (see p. 10 for recipe)

Brown the meat in its own fat. Add the water and one-half of the salt.
Simmer until meat is tender. Add celery, potatoes, onions, peas, and
remaining salt and cook until vegetables are almost tender.

Drain the broth from the meat and vegetables. Add water to the broth if
needed to make 3½ cups. Add ½ cup cold water to the flour and stir until
smooth. Slowly add the flour mixture to the rest of the broth and cook
until thickened, stirring constantly.

Combine the thickened broth with the meat and vegetables.

_To serve immediately._ Pour stew for one meal into a greased baking
dish. Top with a pastry crust. Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) for 30
minutes.

_To freeze._ Cool meat mixture quickly. Place in ovenproof baking dish
and top with pastry. Wrap in freezer packaging material. Or package stew
in freezer containers, leaving head space (p. 4). Seal and freeze.

_To prepare for serving._ Bake meat pies frozen with pastry topping at
400° F. (hot oven) about 4-5 minutes for pints, 1 hour for quarts, or
until stew is piping hot and crust is golden brown.

If stew is frozen without pastry topping, transfer it to a greased
baking dish and place in hot oven. After stew is almost heated through
(about 30 minutes), top with pastry crust. Bake until crust is golden
brown.

_Menu suggestion._ Your favorite fruit salad will add zest to the meal.
For dessert try chocolate fudge cake or pistachio ice cream with
chocolate sauce.


Pastry topping for lamb or beef pie

  3 cups sifted all-purpose flour
  2 teaspoons baking powder
  1 teaspoon salt
  1 cup shortening
  ½ cup cold water

Sift together the flour, baking powder, and salt. Cut in the shortening
until the mixture is granular. Add water and mix lightly with a fork.

Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured board or pastry cloth, roll to
about ⅛ inch in thickness, and cut to fit the baking dish or freezer
container.


Ham turnovers

                     _25 portions, 1 turnover each_

  1½ quarts ground cooked ham (lightly packed)
  ⅓ cup finely chopped onion (well packed)
  1 cup tomato sauce
  2 tablespoons chopped parsley
  ¼ teaspoon pepper
  ¾ teaspoon powdered dry mustard
  ¾ teaspoon prepared horseradish
  6½ cups sifted all-purpose flour
  2 teaspoons salt
  1¾ cups shortening
  1 cup cold water

Combine ham, onion, tomato sauce, parsley, pepper, mustard, and
horseradish.

Make pastry as follows: Sift flour and salt together. Cut in shortening
until the mixture is granular. Add water a little at a time and mix
lightly with a fork. Roll out dough on a lightly floured board to ⅛-inch
thickness. Cut into rounds or squares about 5 inches across.

Place about 2½ tablespoons of ham mixture on each piece of pastry. Fold
pastry over from center, forming a half-moon or triangle. Crimp edges of
pastry together with a fork.

_To serve immediately._ Bake at 400° F. (hot oven) for 25 minutes. Serve
peas or celery in cream sauce over the turnovers.

_To freeze._ Wrap unbaked turnovers individually in the freezer
packaging material and pack in cardboard cartons. Or pack in layers in
moisture-proof freezer containers, separating the layers with two sheets
of cellophane or other moisture-vapor-resistant material. Seal and
freeze.

_To prepare for serving._ Remove the wrapping, place turnovers on a
baking sheet, and bake at 400° F. (hot oven) for 30 minutes.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve peas or celery in cream sauce over the
turnovers. Assorted raw vegetables, baked sweetpotatoes, and cinnamon
apples might complete the menu.


Pork savory

                       _25 portions, ¾ cup each_

  3 pounds lean pork, cut in 1-inch pieces
  1½ teaspoons salt
  ½ teaspoon pepper
  1 tablespoon fat or oil
  3 cups water
  2½ cups sliced carrots
  1 cup sifted all-purpose flour
  3 cups sour cream
  3½ cups diced potatoes
  1 tablespoon finely chopped onion
  1½ cups green lima beans
  1 tablespoon salt

Sprinkle the pork with salt and pepper. Brown the meat in the fat or
oil, add water, cover, and simmer until the meat is tender.

Cook the carrots in a little water until almost tender.

Combine flour and sour cream; beat until smooth. Combine with meat and
broth.

Add the vegetables and salt and blend well.

_To serve immediately._ Bake covered at 375° F. (moderate oven) for 1
hour; remove the cover and continue baking for about 30 minutes to brown
the top.

_To freeze._ Bake covered at 375° F. (moderate oven) for 1 hour. Cool
quickly. Pack in freezer containers, leaving head space (p. 4). Seal and
freeze immediately.

_To prepare for serving._ Bake uncovered at 400° F. (hot oven) until the
food is heated through, about 45 minutes for pints, 1 hour for quarts.

Or reheat in a saucepan over low heat, or in the top of a double boiler,
stirring as needed to prevent sticking.

_Menu suggestion._ A tossed green salad, spiced crabapples, and peach
betty go well with this main dish.


_MEAT LOAVES_

You can make a meat loaf that is to be frozen by any good meat loaf
recipe. Just make enough for several meals instead of one and freeze the
extra loaves. For a change from the usual meat loaf, try this cheese
meat loaf or jellied ham loaf.


Cheese meat loaf

              _25 slices, each about ¾ by 1½ by 4 inches_

  2½ pounds ground beef
  1 cup chopped cheese
  3 tablespoons chopped green pepper
  ⅔ cup chopped onion
  2½ cups dry breadcrumbs
  1 tablespoon salt
  ½ small bay leaf, crushed
  ¼ teaspoon thyme
  Dash of garlic salt
  3 eggs, beaten
  2½ cups tomato puree

Mix the beef, cheese, green pepper, onion, crumbs, and seasonings
thoroughly. Combine eggs and tomatoes, and blend into meat mixture.

_To serve immediately._ Place meat mixture in loaf pan. Bake at 350° F.
(moderate oven) for about 1 hour.

_To freeze._ Meat loaf may be frozen unbaked or baked.

Wrap unbaked meat loaf in moisture-resistant packaging material. Or put
mixture in metal freezer containers or loaf pans; cover with lids or
wrap in packaging material. Seal and freeze.

For frozen baked meat loaf, bake mixture in metal freezer containers or
loaf pans at 350° F. (moderate oven) for about 1 hour. Cool quickly.
Cover or wrap as above. Seal and freeze.

_To prepare for serving._ Bake frozen uncooked meat loaf uncovered at
350° F. (moderate oven) for about 1½ hours or until done.

Cover frozen baked meat loaf with tomato sauce or gravy made from meat
drippings and reheat at 400° F. (hot oven) for about 1 hour. Or, if
preferred, thaw frozen baked meat loaf in the refrigerator, slice, and
serve cold. Or cover slices with gravy or sauce and reheat in a saucepan
over low heat.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve with tomato or mushroom sauce, parsley
potatoes, baked spinach, and cherry tarts.


Jellied ham loaf

                   _25 portions, 1 by 4 by 4 inches_

  5 tablespoons unflavored gelatin
  1 cup cold water
  1½ quarts coarsely ground lean cooked ham
  3 cups chopped celery
  1½ teaspoons onion juice
  ¾ teaspoon powdered horseradish
  ¾ cup mayonnaise
  1½ cups cooked salad dressing (p. 19)
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ¾ teaspoon prepared mustard
  ¾ cup sliced stuffed olives

Soak gelatin in cold water for 5 minutes. Place over hot water until
dissolved. Combine all ingredients. Mix well.

_To serve immediately._ Place in a loaf pan of desired size. Garnish
with sliced hard-cooked eggs. Chill until firm, slice, and serve on
crisp salad greens.

_To freeze._ Place in loaf pans or freezer containers. Chill until firm.
Cover with lids or wrap in freezer packaging material. Seal and freeze.

_To prepare for serving._ Thaw, without unwrapping, in the refrigerator.
Garnish with sliced hard-cooked eggs, slice, and serve on crisp salad
greens.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve with buttered lima beans and sliced tomatoes,
and apple pie a la mode for dessert.


_HEARTY BEAN DISHES_

Cooked dry beans freeze especially well. Because freezing, like cooking,
softens beans somewhat, cook them until barely tender for the best
quality frozen product.


Baked beans

                       _25 portions, 1 cup each_

  2¼ quarts (4 pounds) dry beans, Great Northern or pea
  4 quarts boiling water
  ¾ pound salt pork, sliced
  ¼ teaspoon red pepper
  1 cup brown sugar, well packed
  3½ teaspoons powdered dry mustard
  2 tablespoons salt
  1 cup chopped onion
  1 cup molasses

Add beans to boiling water and boil 2 minutes. Remove from heat and soak
in the hot water 1 hour. Or if more convenient, soak overnight after the
2-minute boil.

Drain beans and heat the drained liquid. Place beans in beanpots or
other covered baking dishes with a slice of salt pork in the center of
each. Top with slices of salt pork.

Combine seasonings, onion, and molasses and pour over beans. Add hot
bean liquid. Additional water may be needed as the beans bake.

_To serve immediately._ Cover and bake at 300° F. (slow oven) for 6
hours or until the beans are tender.

_To freeze._ Bake the beans covered at 300° F. (slow oven) for 5 hours
or until nearly done. Cool quickly. Pack in freezer containers, leaving
head space (p. 4). Seal and freeze immediately.

_To prepare for serving._ Add a small amount of water to the beans and
reheat in a saucepan over low heat, stirring frequently to prevent
sticking. Or reheat in the top of a double boiler. Or bake at 400° F.
(hot oven) until beans are heated through, about 45 minutes for pints, 1
hour for quarts.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve with coleslaw, brown bread, and lemon sponge
pudding.


Barbecued lima beans

                       _16 portions, ¾ cup each_

  4½ cups (2 pounds) baby lima beans, dry
  2 quarts boiling water
  ½ pound chopped salt pork or bacon
  1 cup chopped onion
  1¼ teaspoons minced garlic
  3 tablespoons prepared mustard
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 teaspoons worcestershire sauce
  2 teaspoons chili powder
  2½ cups condensed tomato soup
  ¼ cup vinegar
  4 teaspoons brown sugar
  2 cups bean liquid

Add beans to boiling water and boil 2 minutes. Remove from heat and soak
in the hot water 1 hour. Or if more convenient, soak overnight after the
2-minute boil. Boil beans gently in the soaking liquid until almost done
(about 40 minutes).

Brown the salt pork or bacon, onion, and garlic. Add mustard, salt,
worcestershire sauce, chili powder, tomato soup, vinegar, sugar, and
beans and bean liquid.

_To serve immediately._ Pour into greased baking dish or pan. Bake at
400° F. (hot oven) for 30 minutes.

_To freeze._ Cool the beans quickly. Pack in freezer containers, leaving
head space (p. 4). Seal and freeze immediately.

_To prepare for serving._ Proceed as for baked beans, page 15.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve with asparagus salad garnished with pimiento
strips, and orange bavarian cream for dessert.


Ham and bean scallop

                       _25 portions, 1 cup each_

  1¾ quarts (3 pounds) dry pea beans
  3 quarts boiling water
  5 cups cooked ham, diced
  ½ cup ham fat
  1½ cups finely chopped onion
  ½ cup sifted all-purpose flour
  2 tablespoons worcestershire sauce
  2 teaspoons powdered dry mustard
  2 teaspoons salt
  2 quarts milk
  3 cups grated cheese

Add beans to boiling water and boil 2 minutes. Remove from heat and soak
in the hot water 1 hour. Or if more convenient, soak overnight after the
2-minute boil. Cook beans in the soaking liquid about 1½ hours (slightly
underdone).

Heat the fat, add onion, and cook until golden brown. Add flour,
worcestershire sauce, mustard, and salt, blending to a smooth paste.
Stir in the milk. Cook until thickened, stirring constantly. Combine
cheese, ham, and beans with the sauce. Remove from heat.

_To serve immediately._ Pour enough of the mixture for one meal into a
greased baking dish or pan. Top with ½ cup fine dry breadcrumbs and bake
at 350° F. (moderate oven) about 20 minutes, or until crumbs are golden
brown.

_To freeze._ Cool the food quickly. Pack in freezer containers, leaving
head space (p. 4). Seal and freeze immediately.

_To prepare for serving._ Reheat in the top of a double boiler, stirring
occasionally to speed thawing. Or, if food is frozen in an ovenproof
container, uncover, top with fine dry breadcrumbs, and bake at 400° F.
(hot oven) about 45 minutes for pints, 1 hour for quarts.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve with brussels sprouts, stewed tomatoes, and
celery sticks, have sauteed peach halves for dessert.


Beans and sausage, Mexican style

                       _25 portions, 1 cup each_

  1½ quarts (2½ pounds) dry kidney beans
  4½ quarts boiling water
  1 quart chopped onion
  1¼ cups chopped green pepper
  1 tablespoon minced garlic
  4 pounds bulk pork sausage
  1 quart bean liquid
  2 tablespoons salt
  2 tablespoons chili powder (or to taste)
  2 quarts canned tomatoes
  ½ cup sifted all-purpose flour

Add beans to boiling water and boil 2 minutes. Remove from heat and soak
in the hot water 1 hour. Or if more convenient, soak overnight after the
2-minute boil. Cook beans in the soaking liquid about 1 hour (slightly
underdone). Drain; save the liquid and if necessary add water to make 1
quart.

Combine onion, green pepper, garlic, and sausage. Cook until sausage is
light brown, breaking it up as it cooks. Add beans, bean liquid, salt,
chili powder, and tomatoes, reserving ½ cup tomato liquid. Blend flour
with reserved tomato liquid and add to bean mixture. Blend well. Simmer
until thickened (about 30 minutes), stirring frequently to prevent
sticking.

_To serve immediately._ Simmer until beans are tender. Serve on mounds
of fluffy rice.

_To freeze._ Cool the bean and sausage mixture quickly. Pack in freezer
containers, leaving head space (p. 4). Seal and freeze immediately.

_To prepare for serving._ Add a small amount of water and reheat in a
saucepan over low heat, stirring frequently to prevent sticking. Or
reheat in the top of a double boiler. Or bake at 400° F. (hot oven)
until the food is heated through, about 45 minutes for pints, 1 hour for
quarts.

_Menu suggestion._ Serve plain or on rice, with tossed green salad and
french bread, and for dessert have pineapple sherbet.


Cooked salad dressing for jellied ham loaf

  ¼ cup sugar
  2 teaspoons flour
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  ¾ teaspoon powdered dry mustard
  Few grains cayenne
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  1½ teaspoons butter or margarine, melted
  ¾ cup milk
  6 tablespoons vinegar
  2 eggs, slightly beaten

Mix sugar, flour, and seasonings.

Stir butter or margarine into the dry ingredients gradually. Slowly
blend in the milk, then the vinegar.

Cook over hot water until mixture thickens, stirring occasionally. Stir
a little of the hot mixture into the egg and add to rest of mixture.
Cook 3 minutes, stirring constantly.




                           _INDEX TO RECIPES_


  Page
  Baked beans                                                         15
  Barbecued lima beans                                                16
  Beans and sausage, Mexican style                                    18
  Cheese meat loaf                                                    13
  Chicken a la king                                                    7
  Creamed chicken                                                      6
  Ham and bean scallop                                                17
  Ham turnovers                                                       11
  Jellied ham loaf                                                    14
  Lamb or beef pie                                                     9
  Pastry topping for lamb or beef pie                                 10
  Pork savory                                                         12
  Salad dressing, cooked, for jellied ham loaf                        19
  Turkey-macaroni casserole                                            8


                           _MORE INFORMATION_

  _Order No._
  Home Freezing of Fruits and Vegetables                            G 10
  Home Freezers . . . Their Selection and Use                       G 48
  Home Care of Purchased Frozen Foods                               G 69
  Home Freezing of Poultry                                          G 70
  Freezing Meat and Fish in the Home                                G 93

  These publications are available from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 20250.


                               This is a
                           _Consumer Service_
                                of USDA

                   Human Nutrition Research Division
                     Agricultural Research Service
                     U.S. Department of Agriculture
                            Washington, D.C.
                            Issued July 1954
                           Revised April 1965

             U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE:1965—O-763-705


      For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government
         Printing Office. Washington. D.C. 20402—Price 10 cents




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos, including listed errata.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Freezing Combination Main Dishes, by Anonymous

